Name

    ATI_meminfo

Name Strings

    GL_ATI_meminfo

Contributors

    Roy Blackmer, ATI Technologies
    Bruno Stefanizzi, ATI Technologies
    Andreas Wolf, ATI Technologies
    Evan Hart, ATI Technologies

Contact

    Bruno Stefanizzi, AMD (bruno.stefanizzi 'at' amd.com)

Status

    ???

Version

    Date: March 2, 2009
    Revision: 0.2

Number

    359

Dependencies

    OpenGL 1.1 is required

    ARB_vertex_buffer_object affects the defintion of this extension

    EXT_framebuffer_object affects the definition of this extension

    This extension is written against the 2.0 version of the OpenGL
    Specification, modified with EXT_framebuffer_object.

Overview

    Traditionally, OpenGL has treated resource management as a task of hardware
    virtualization hidden from applications. While providing great portability,
    this shielding of information can prevent applications from making
    intelligent decisions on the management of resources they create. For
    instance, an application may be better served by choosing a different
    rendering method if there is not sufficient resources to efficiently
    utilize its preferred method.

Issues

    1) Revealing the management of memory directly is somewhat controversial,
       is this really desirable?

        The intent of this extension is to provide insight into the consumption
        of memory. It does not require that exact values be returned. The
        information is intended to be a hint to the application about the
        status at a particular moment in time. As such, the value returned does
        not need to reveal the exact information, but instead it could return
        a conservative value of 80% of actual availability. In any case, it is
        highly reccommended that the information be returned in kilobytes.

    2) Memory can come from different pools that may interact. How should this
        be dealt with?

        The queries will enumerate different classes of memory based on modern
        OpenGL paradigms. The classes defined so far are texture, vertex
        buffer, an render buffer. These correspond to API visible capabilities
        such as readable, writable, and mapable. The memory between these pools
        may often be shared, so allocations in one pool may reduce all pools. 

    3) Are the abreviations and names correct?

        Probably not.

    4) How should the values be returned?

        Returning all information about a memory type in a single query is
        most optimal. Values are returned as 4 integers: total pool available,
        largest pool available, total auxilliary pool available, and largest
        auxilliary pool available. Auxilliary pool are for remote memory.

New Functions and Procedures

    None

New Tokens


        VBO_FREE_MEMORY_ATI                     0x87FB
        TEXTURE_FREE_MEMORY_ATI                 0x87FC
        RENDERBUFFER_FREE_MEMORY_ATI            0x87FD

