Name

    EXT_framebuffer_multisample_blit_scaled

Name Strings

    GL_EXT_framebuffer_multisample_blit_scaled

Contact

    Gareth Hughes, NVIDIA Corporation (gareth 'at' nvidia.com)

Contributors

    Jeff Bolz, NVIDIA
    Pat Brown, NVIDIA
    Alex Eddy, Apple
    Gareth Hughes, NVIDIA
    Eric Werness, NVIDIA

Status

    Complete.

Version

    Last Modified Date:         07/05/11
    Revision:                   8

Number

    409

Dependencies

    ARB_framebuffer_object is required.

    Written based on the wording of the OpenGL 2.1 specification.


Overview

    This extension relaxes some of the restrictions associated with
    multisample resolve operations, specifically to allow a combined
    resolve and scale operation through a single call to BlitFramebuffer.
    It also adds two new filter types to control the quality of the
    combined scaled resolve operation.

    In traditional multisampled framebuffer rendering, color samples
    must be explicitly resolved via BlitFramebuffer before any other
    operation on the resulting pixel values can be performed.  This
    multisample resolve operation must be done using a BlitFramebuffer
    call where the dimensions of the source and destination rectangles
    are identical.  If the resulting pixel values need to be copied to a
    texture with different dimensions, these resolved values can then be
    scaled with a second call to BlitFramebuffer.

    By requiring two separate calls to BlitFramebuffer, the quality
    of final image can be maintained to a certain degree.  The samples
    are first resolved, and then these resolved values can be filtered
    to produce the final image.  This image quality comes at the price
    of increased memory usage and lower performance.  However, the
    scaling blit can still introduce artifacts, particularly if it is
    done with a simple bilinear filter.

    The new filter types introduced by this extension allow the scaled
    resolve to be done with a single call to BlitFramebuffer.  Not all
    samples from the read framebuffer are required to be be used when
    producing the final pixel values, and there may be a loss in quality
    when compared to an image produced by a separate resolve and scale.
    However, the single-pass scaled resolve blit should be faster than
    the traditional two-pass resolve then scale blits.


New Procedures and Functions

    None.


New Types

    None.


New Tokens


      SCALED_RESOLVE_FASTEST_EXT                        0x90BA
      SCALED_RESOLVE_NICEST_EXT                         0x90BB


