Name
    
    EXT_texture_filter_anisotropic

Name Strings

    GL_EXT_texture_filter_anisotropic

Notice

    Copyright NVIDIA Corporation, 1999.

Version

    Last updated November 12, 2014

Number

    OpenGL Extension #187
    OpenGL ES Extension #41

Dependencies

    Written based on the wording of the OpenGL 1.2 specification.

Overview

    Texture mapping using OpenGL's existing mipmap texture filtering
    modes assumes that the projection of the pixel filter footprint into
    texture space is a square (ie, isotropic).  In practice however, the
    footprint may be long and narrow (ie, anisotropic).  Consequently,
    mipmap filtering severely blurs images on surfaces angled obliquely
    away from the viewer.

    Several approaches exist for improving texture sampling by accounting
    for the anisotropic nature of the pixel filter footprint into texture
    space.  This extension provides a general mechanism for supporting
    anisotropic texturing filtering schemes without specifying a
    particular formulation of anisotropic filtering.

    The extension permits the OpenGL application to specify on
    a per-texture object basis the maximum degree of anisotropy to
    account for in texture filtering.

    Increasing a texture object's maximum degree of anisotropy may
    improve texture filtering but may also significantly reduce the
    implementation's texture filtering rate.  Implementations are free
    to clamp the specified degree of anisotropy to the implementation's
    maximum supported degree of anisotropy.

    A texture's maximum degree of anisotropy is specified independent
    from the texture's minification and magnification filter (as
    opposed to being supported as an entirely new filtering mode).
    Implementations are free to use the specified minification and
    magnification filter to select a particular anisotropic texture
    filtering scheme.  For example, a NEAREST filter with a maximum
    degree of anisotropy of two could be treated as a 2-tap filter that
    accounts for the direction of anisotropy.  Implementations are also
    permitted to ignore the minification or magnification filter and
    implement the highest quality of anisotropic filtering possible.

    Applications seeking the highest quality anisotropic filtering
    available are advised to request a LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR minification
    filter, a LINEAR magnification filter, and a large maximum degree
    of anisotropy.

Issues

    Should there be a particular anisotropic texture filtering minification
    and magnification mode?

      RESOLUTION:  NO.  The maximum degree of anisotropy should control
      when anisotropic texturing is used.  Making this orthogonal to
      the minification and magnification filtering modes allows these
      settings to influence the anisotropic scheme used.  Yes, such
      an anisotropic filtering scheme exists in hardware.

    What should the minimum value for MAX_TEXTURE_MAX_ANISOTROPY_EXT be?

      RESOLUTION:  2.0.  To support this extension, at least 2 to 1
      anisotropy should be supported.

    Should an implementation-defined limit for the maximum maximum degree of
    anisotropy be "get-able"?

      RESOLUTION:  YES.  But you should not assume that a high maximum
      maximum degree of anisotropy implies anything about texture
      filtering performance or quality.

    Should anything particular be said about anisotropic 3D texture filtering?

      Not sure.  Does the implementation example shown in the spec for
      2D anisotropic texture filtering readily extend to 3D anisotropic
      texture filtering?

New Procedures and Functions

    None

New Tokens


        TEXTURE_MAX_ANISOTROPY_EXT          0x84FE


        MAX_TEXTURE_MAX_ANISOTROPY_EXT      0x84FF

