Name

    AMD_query_buffer_object

Name Strings

    GL_AMD_query_buffer_object

Contact

    Daniel Rakos (daniel.rakos 'at' amd.com)

Contributors

    Daniel Rakos, AMD
    Graham Sellers, AMD
    Christophe Riccio, AMD

Status

    Shipping in Catalyst 12.6

Version

    Last Modified Date:         06/01/2012
    Author Revision:            5

Number

    420

Dependencies

    OpenGL 1.5 is required.

    This extension is written against the OpenGL 4.2 (core) specification.

Overview

    Statistics about the operation of the OpenGL pipeline, such as the number
    of samples that passed the depth test, the elapsed time between two events
    or the number of vertices written to a transform feedback buffer may
    be retrieved from the GL through query objects. The current value of a
    query object may be retrieved by the application through the OpenGL API.
    Should the result returned by the API be required for use in a shader,
    it must be passed back to the GL via a program uniform or some other
    mechanism. This requires a round-trip from the GPU to the CPU and back.

    This extension introduces a mechanism whereby the current value of a query
    result may be retrieved into a buffer object instead of client memory.
    This allows the query result to be made available to a shader without a
    round-trip to the CPU for example by subsequently using the buffer object
    as a uniform buffer, texture buffer or other data store visible to the
    shader. This functionality may also be used to place the results of
    many query objects into a single, large buffer and then map or otherwise
    read back the entire buffer at a later point in time, avoiding a per-query
    CPU-GPU synchronization event.

    The result of any query object type supported by the GL implementation
    may be retrieved into a buffer object. The implementation will determine
    the most efficient method of copying the query result to the buffer.

New Procedures and Functions

    None.

New Tokens


        QUERY_RESULT_NO_WAIT_AMD                        0x9194


        QUERY_BUFFER_AMD                                0x9192


        QUERY_BUFFER_BINDING_AMD                        0x9193

