Name

    SGI_cushion

Name Strings

    GLX_SGI_cushion

Version

    $Date: 1997/10/13 21:16:02 $ $Revision: 1.3 $

Number

    62

Dependencies

    SGI_swap_control is required
    SGIX_fbconfig affects the definition of this extension

Overview

    This extension is directed at constant frame-rate applications.  Such
    applications are written to ensure that a new image is generated every
    N video frame periods, where N is itself a small constant integer.
    If the application is unable to generate a frame within N video frame
    periods, it is said to have dropped a frame.  Dropping a frame is a
    *bad thing*.

    Constant frame-rate applications make every effort to avoid dropping
    frames.  In particular, they monitor the utilization of graphics
    resources during the rendering of the current frame in order to predict
    the behavior of subsequent frames.  If such prediction indicates that
    a frame may be dropped, the rendering complexity of the frame is
    reduced (e.g. by using models of lower geometric resolution) so as to
    avoid the overload condition.

    Unfortunately, because exact prediction is not possible, and because
    there is no elasticity in the buffering of images, it is necessary
    for constant frame-rate applications to under utilize the graphics
    hardware.  This extension adds elasticity to the buffering of completed
    images, in order to allow constant frame-rate applications to make full
    use of the available graphics computation without dropping frames.
    It further allows this elasticity to be controlled by the application in
    order to minimize the introduction of latency that could otherwise
    occur.

    Applications that will benefit from this extension include simulation,
    walk-through, and multimedia playback.

    WARNING - Silicon Graphics has filed for patent protection for some
	      of the techniques described in this extension document.

Issues

    *	This spec should talk about the vertical retrace interrupt, but I
	can't find any mention of it in any other extension.  Where is such
	an interrupt specified?

    *	Are additional queries of rendering performance required to make
	extension useful?

    *	How should this extension interact with SGI_video_sync?

    *	How is the cushion value queried?

    *	Can this be implemented efficiently on current hardware systems?

New Procedures and Functions

    void glXCushionSGI(Display *dpy, Window window, float cushion);

New Tokens



