Name

    ARB_query_buffer_object

Name Strings

    GL_ARB_query_buffer_object

Contact

    Daniel Rakos (daniel.rakos 'at' amd.com)

Contributors

    Daniel Rakos, AMD
    Graham Sellers, AMD
    Christophe Riccio, AMD

Notice

    Copyright (c) 2013 The Khronos Group Inc. Copyright terms at
        http://www.khronos.org/registry/speccopyright.html

Status

    Complete. Approved by the ARB on June 3, 2013.
    Ratified by the Khronos Board of Promoters on July 19, 2013.

Version

    Last Modified Date: 2 April 2013
    Author Revision: 2

Number

    ARB Extension #148

Dependencies

    OpenGL 1.5 is required.

    This extension is written against the OpenGL 4.3 (core) specification.

Overview

    Statistics about the operation of the OpenGL pipeline, such as the number
    of samples that passed the depth test, the elapsed time between two events
    or the number of vertices written by transform feedback can be retrieved
    from the GL through query objects. The result of a query object is
    acquired by the application through the OpenGL API into a client provided
    memory location. Should the result returned by the API be required for use
    in a shader, it must be passed back to the GL via a program uniform or
    some other mechanism. This requires a round-trip from the GPU to the CPU
    and back.

    This extension introduces a mechanism whereby the result of a query object
    may be retrieved into a buffer object instead of client memory. This allows
    the query rsult to be made available to a shader without a round-trip to
    the CPU for example by subsequently using the buffer object as a uniform
    buffer, texture buffer or other data store visible to the shader. This
    functionality may also be used to place the results of many query objects
    into a single, large buffer and then map or otherwise read back the entire
    buffer at a later point in time, avoiding a per-query object CPU-GPU
    synchronization event.

    The extension allows acquiring the result of any query object type
    supported by the GL implementation into a buffer object. The implementation
    will determine the most efficient method of copying the query result to the
    buffer.

New Procedures and Functions

    None.

New Tokens


        QUERY_RESULT_NO_WAIT                            0x9194


        QUERY_BUFFER                                    0x9192


        QUERY_BUFFER_BINDING                            0x9193


        QUERY_BUFFER_BARRIER_BIT                        0x00008000

