Name

    NV_draw_texture

Name Strings

    GL_NV_draw_texture

Contributors

    Steven Holte, NVIDIA Corporation (sholte 'at' nvidia.com)

Contact

    Pat Brown, NVIDIA Corporation (pbrown 'at' nvidia.com)

Status

    Complete

Version

    Last Modified Date:         9/19/2012
    NVIDIA Revision:            2

Number

    OpenGL Extension #430
    OpenGL ES Extension #126

Dependencies

    This extension is written against the OpenGL 4.1 Specification
    (Compatibility Profile).

    This extension can also be used with OpenGL ES 2.0 or later (see the section,
    "Interactions with OpenGL ES," below).

    This extension interacts with EXT_shadow_samplers.

Overview

    This extension provides a new function, DrawTextureNV(), allowing
    applications to draw an screen-aligned rectangle displaying some or all of
    the contents of a two-dimensional or rectangle texture.  Callers specify a
    texture object, an optional sampler object, window coordinates of the
    rectangle to draw, and texture coordinates corresponding to the corners of
    the rectangle.  For each fragment produced by the rectangle, DrawTextureNV
    interpolates the texture coordinates, performs a texture lookup, and uses
    the texture result as the fragment color.

    No shaders are used by DrawTextureNV; the results of the texture lookup
    are used in lieu of a fragment shader output.  The fragments generated are
    processed by all per-fragment operations.  In particular,
    DrawTextureNV() fully supports blending and multisampling.

    While this functionality can be obtained in unextended OpenGL by drawing a
    rectangle and using a fragment shader to do a texture lookup,
    DrawTextureNV() is likely to have better power efficiency on
    implementations supporting this extension.  Additionally, use of this
    extension frees the application developer from having to set up
    specialized shaders, transformation matrices, vertex attributes, and
    various other state in order to render the rectangle.

New Procedures and Functions

    void DrawTextureNV(GLuint texture, GLuint sampler,
                       GLfloat x0, GLfloat y0, 
                       GLfloat x1, GLfloat y1,
                       GLfloat z,
                       GLfloat s0, GLfloat t0, 
                       GLfloat s1, GLfloat t1);

New Tokens


