Name

    NV_multisample_filter_hint

Name Strings

    GL_NV_multisample_filter_hint

Contact

    Mark J. Kilgard, NVIDIA Corporation (mjk 'at' nvidia.com)

Notice

    Copyright NVIDIA Corporation, 2001.

IP Status

    NVIDIA Proprietary.

Status

    Shipping, May 2001

Version

    NVIDIA Date: May 16, 2001
    Version:     1

Number

    259

Dependencies

    Written based on the OpenGL 1.2.1 specification.

    Requires ARB_multisample.

Overview

    OpenGL multisampling typically assumes that the samples of a given
    pixel are weighted uniformly and averaged to compute the pixel's
    resolved color.  This extension provides a hint that permits
    implementations to provide an alternative method of resolving the
    color of multisampled pixels.

    As an example of such an alternative method, NVIDIA's GeForce3 GPU
    provides a technique known as Quincunx filtering.  This technique
    is used in two-sample multisampling, but it blends the pixel's two
    samples and three additional samples from adjacent pixels.  The sample
    pattern is analogous to the 5 pattern on a die.  The quality of this
    technique is widely regarded as comparable to 4 sample multisampling.

Issues

    Is the glHint mechanism the right mechanism to expose this functionality?

      RESOLUTION:  Yes.  Multisample filtering quality is subject to
      the kinds of variations that the glHint was intended to control.

      Arguably, the glHint mechanism only provides two definite settings:
      GL_FASTEST and GL_NICEST while there may be many different
      techniques for controlling multisample filtering quality.
      We expect hardware to support only one or two techniques rather
      than a multitude of nearly indistinguishable sampling techniques.

    When does changing the multisampling filter hint take effect?
    
      RESOLUTION: It may not be until the next swap buffers or glClear
      operation that the multisample hint actually takes effect.
      This may be implementation dependent.

    What is the meaning of GL_DONT_CARE for the multisample hint?

      RESOLUTION:  By default, NVIDIA expects to treat GL_DONT_CARE
      the same as GL_FASTEST.  However, the meaning of GL_DONT_CARE
      for this hint may be subject to a registry (or environment) setting,
      possibly settable through a control panel.

    Does GL_NICEST require Quincunx filtering?

      RESOLUTION:  No.  NVIDIA's GeForce3 Quincunx filtering is one
      possible technique that may be used to implement the GL_NICEST
      setting, but future GPUs may use other techniques.

    Can the meaning of the multisample hint vary depending on the number
    of samples of the drawable?

      RESOLUTION:  Yes.

      The following describes how GeForce3 uses the multisample hint:

      When using 2-sample multisampling with GeForce3, the multisample
      filter hint affects multisample filtering as follows: GL_NICEST uses
      5-tap Quincunx multisample filtering while GL_FASTEST uses standard
      even-weighted 2-tap multisample filtering of the pixel's 2 samples.

      When using 4-sample multisampling with GeForce3, the multisample
      filter hint affects multisample filtering as follows: GL_NICEST
      uses 9-tap 3x3 multisample filtering while GL_FASTEST uses standard
      even-weighted 4-tap multisample filtering of the pixel's 4 samples.

    What is the difference between a "tap" and a "sample"?

      In the context of multisample filtering, a sample is
      a subpixel frame buffer sample containing color, depth, and
      stencil information.  A tap is a source of data for filtering.
      Typically, samples are filtered by evenly weighting all the samples
      belonging to a pixel.  In this case, the number of taps for the
      filter is equal to the number of samples for the pixel.  In other
      filtering schemes, the number of taps and samples may not be equal
      (and potentially not evenly weighted as well).  For example,
      GeForce3's quincunx filtering uses 5 taps even though each pixel
      has only 2 multisample samples.  Three of the five taps source
      samples outside the pixel's footprint of two samples.

    Should the multisample filtering technique be determined by the
    visual/PFD rather than OpenGL rendering context state?

      RESOLUTION:  No.  The number of multisample samples per pixel that
      a window has is a property of the visual/PFD, but the filtering
      technique does not have to be defined up-front at when the pixel
      format is set.

    While not quite consistent with the way ARB_multisample is specified,
    NVIDIA uses the SwapBuffers operation as a trigger for downsampling
    multisample sample buffers (other operations such as glReadPixels
    also trigger downsampling).  But a SwapBuffers operation can be
    requested without a current OpenGL rendering context.  What happens
    when a SwapBuffers operation is performed with no current OpenGL
    rendering context?

      RESOLUTION:  The multisample filter hint is treated as GL_DONT_CARE
      in this case.  Applications that want the multisample filter hint
      to apply to their BufferSwap operation should perform the BufferSwap
      operation while bound to an OpenGL rendering context.

New Procedures and Functions

    None

New Tokens


        MULTISAMPLE_FILTER_HINT_NV                0x8534

