Name
    
     NV_register_combiners2

Name Strings

     GL_NV_register_combiners2

Contact

    Mark J. Kilgard, NVIDIA Corporation (mjk 'at' nvidia.com)

Contributors

    Thomas Roell

Notice

     Copyright NVIDIA Corporation, 2000, 2001, 2004.

IP Status

    NVIDIA Proprietary.

Status

    Implemented.

Version

    NVIDIA Date: December 13, 2004
    Version 1.2

Number

    227

Dependencies

    Written based on the wording of the OpenGL 1.2.1 specification.

    Assumes support for the NV_register_combiners extension (version 1.4).

Overview

    The NV_register_combiners extension provides a powerful fragment
    coloring mechanism.  This specification extends the register combiners
    functionality to support more color constant values that are unique
    for each general combiner stage.

    The base register combiners functionality supports only two color
    constants.  These two constants are available in every general
    combiner stage and in the final combiner.

    When many general combiner stages are supported, more than two
    unique color constants is often required.  The obvious way to extend
    the register combiners is to add several more color constant
    registers.  But adding new unique color constant registers is
    expensive for hardware implementation because every color constant
    register must be available as an input to any stage.

    In practice however, it is the total set of general combiner stages
    that requires more color constants, not each and every individual
    general combiner stage.  Each individual general combiner stage
    typically requires only one or two color constants.

    By keeping two color constant registers but making these two registers
    contain two unique color constant values for each general combiner
    stage, the hardware expense of supporting multiple color constants
    is minimized.  Additionally, this scheme scales appropriately as
    more general combiner stages are added.

Issues

    How do is compatibility maintained with the original register
    combiners?
      
      RESOLUTION:  Initially, per general combiner stage constants are
      disabled and the register combiners operate as described in the
      original NV_register_combiners specification.  A distinct "per
      stage constants" enable exposes this extension's new functionality.

    Where do the final combiner color constant values come from?

      RESOLUTION:  When "per stage constants" is enabled, the final
      combiner color constants continue to use the constant colors set
      with glCombinerParameterfvNV.

    Is the alpha component of the SECONDARY_COLOR_NV register now
    initialized with the expected interpolated secondary color's alpha
    component.

       RESOLUTION:  Yes, see Revision History for details.

New Procedures and Functions

    void CombinerStageParameterfvNV(GLenum stage,
                                    GLenum pname,
                                    const GLfloat *params);

    void GetCombinerStageParameterfvNV(GLenum stage,
                                       GLenum pname,
                                       GLfloat *params);

New Tokens


        PER_STAGE_CONSTANTS_NV                         0x8535





